What is envy? Do you know?
It's important that we be able to identify the symptoms of envy.
Why? Because envy is an expression
of hatred. It's an enemy of peace
and if left unchecked, it can result in spiritual
death. As described in the Bible,
envy has two symptoms. The first is probably more
familiar, an envious person wants what someone else has.
It's the second symptom that makes envy especially dangerous.
An envious person not only wants what someone else has,
he doesn't want the other person to have it.
Here's an example. In the first century,
Jewish religious leaders envy Jesus
because Jesus was much appreciated by the common people.
Jesus dealt with people, including lolley ones,
in a way that dignified them. As a result,
he was appreciated.
The religious leaders envied him,
but rather than adjusting their own way of dealing with people,
they attacked Jesus verbally in an effort to destroy his good reputation.
They spread malicious slander.
Not only did they want what Jesus had,
they didn't want Jesus to have it.
No wonder envy is listed as one of the works of the flush
in Galatians chapter 5 verse 21.
It's a dangerous quality that we need to avoid.
How does envy disrupt peace?
Envy undermines damages or even destroys relationships
in the family and in the congregation.
Consider the example of Jacob and his 12 sons.
Jacob had special affection for one of his sons, Joseph.
As a result, Joseph's brothers became envious.
How did the envy manifest itself? What was the fruitage?
Well, they dealt treacherously with Joseph
selling him into slavery. And as if that weren't bad enough,
they compounded their wrong by lying to Jacob,
telling him that Joseph was dead.
According to the Bible account, Jacob refused to be comforted.
He mourned Joseph for years. What a terrible consequence of envy.
It's clear that envy allows no room for love, compassion, or kindness.
Those qualities go out the window.
And they're replaced by qualities such as a hatred,
strife, fits of anger. Can envy disrupt the peace of a congregation?
Consider the examples of Korah, Daithun, and Abairun.
They envied Moses and Aaron in the congregation of Israel.
How did that envy manifest itself?
Well, they began to speak negatively, critically of Jehovah's
representatives, even accusing Moses of playing the prince
and lifting himself up above the others.
They forgot that Jehovah had put Moses and Aaron
in their positions of responsibility.
How did Jehovah react to that manifestation of envy?
He destroyed those three men and all who supported them
for a time the congregation was robbed of its peace,
and the account certainly provides some insight into Jehovah's view
of envy. Now, by this point, you're no doubt thinking I would never want
something so badly that I would damage someone else to get it,
but we're all imperfect. We have a treacherous heart,
and envy is insidious. In the following dramatization,
notice how envy threatens to disrupt peace.
Clearly, bad news.
She's a sweating. It reminds me I want to speak to her about a necklace.
You too. You don't think she's showing off?
No. Everyone thinks she's miswonderful. She's starting to agree.
Is this just about Haley? It seems it's all about Haley.
Your tea's getting cold, and you're changing the subject.
No, but you've brought this up before.
What is it? Your friends, you pioneered together.
Yeah, and that's why I'm concerned.
Concern is good, but is there just a little bit of envy in there?
What did you notice? Well, Emily is suffering from an onset of envy.
Did you notice how she questioned Haley's motives?
And potentially called Haley's reputation into question.
It could happen to any one of us.
So how do we battle and conquer envy?
By cultivating two beautiful qualities, humility and contentment.
Let's see what the Bible has to say about humility.
Turn with me, please, to Philippians chapter 2, and we're going to begin reading in verse 3.
Philippians chapter 2 verse 3 do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism.
What is egotism? Well, it's having an exaggerated opinion of oneself.
Do you think that the religious leaders in Jesus' day, Joseph's brothers,
Korah, Nathan, and Abiram had this affliction? Did they have an exaggerated view of themselves
without question? But it's an affliction that could affect any one of us. What is the solution?
Well, Paul continues, but with humility or lowliness of mind, consider others superior to you,
or consider others as more important than yourself.
Now, that kind of mindset allows a person to do what stated in verse 4,
as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
A humble person looks out for others. He doesn't feel that he deserves more than others.
A content person is satisfied with what he has. He doesn't compare his privilege or his possession
with another person's privilege or possession. He's content. Humility, contentment.
With Jehovah's help, we can cultivate these beautiful qualities,
qualities that leave no room for envy. And in doing so, we promote peace,
inner peace, peace in our family, and peace in the congregation. And you can be sure that Jehovah
appreciates that. Brother Gaius Glockentine, a helper to the publishing committee, will now present
the next talk of the symposium. Put away peace records. Dis-honesty.